wife I'll start recording. Um this is um
it's quite a lot. I'll try this is sort
of a combination of a couple of talks
actually which I've tried to put
together. So but I mean hopefully um
that this is just general advice on what
to do if your program doesn't go as fast
as you as you think it should go. And we
start off some general observations
about parallelization and such like and
then go on to a few more detailed things
about how which link more to the
previous lecture about how send and
receive are actually implemented under
the hood.
I've lost my cursor. So you can divide
the overheads up into sort of four main
categories in your parallel program. Um
why doesn't my program scale linearly
for example as well as I should? One is
lack of parallelism. One is load
imbalance, one is synchronization, one
is communication. The first two are very
much just your algorithm and it's very
hard to do anything about them. Um
um
okay. So Ian said, "I just tried the
single notebook with 128 task." So what
that will actually do
is um
that will actually
um
that is still doing a ping pong between
two processes but they will be
physically on different places on the on
the node. So um the the when we um by
default if you just run two MPI tasks
they are on the first two CPU core. So
they're very close together physically.
They're on the same physical processor
sharing the same L3 cache and stuff in
the same NUMA region. If you're on 128
it ping pong between ranks N and 127
which are at the extreme edge. So
they're on different NUMA regions
different processors.
So so they're very different. Um
but that's interesting. Um synthes that
again I don't understand that. So there
is there is definitely some you are
seeing effects of the way that the
memory is laid out and the way that
copying happens on a shared memory numa
system but I don't I can't quantify why
it's um yeah caching caching makes up
yeah I still don't understand I I can
come up with lots of reasons why it it's
it's slow at large sizes because you can
say you're blowing the cache but but
it's not clear why there's such a
difference between synchronous and
asynchron synchronous and standard. you
come up with lots of reasons why for
large messages it will be slow because
you run out of cash but not uh why
there's difference between the two
modes. So that's interesting.
Um the first two lack of parallelism and
lack of loads are really only um um can
be addressed by improving your algorithm
which is kind of outside the scope of
the course but synchronization
communication you can try and uh affect
by the way you write your MPI.
So you know lack of parallelism task
maybe this is this is law task may be
added with only a subset task of
computing there's a serial component and
the difficult thing is worked on task
zero only for example naive IO for
example or setup so really the only cue
is to redesign the algorithm that is
that is really all there is um um or if
if the we're not going to cover it in
this course but if if your overhead is
IO and you're doing IO through a single
controller process then The solution
would be to use parallel IO such as
MPIO, but that's we're not going to
cover that today.
Load imbalance is much harder. All tasks
have some work to some problem than
others. It's a much harder problem to
solve. If you're doing OpenMP
programming, shared variables, threaded
programming, then it's really quite easy
because at any one point any thread can
operate on any data. So you can tell you
however
with distributed memory message passing
if you want to move work you have to
move the data because you can't share
memory and in fact can often take such
an overhead to moving work to a to a
free processor and getting the results
back is not worth doing it. There can be
very significant algorithmic changes
scaling to large process counts can be
hard because often load balancing
algorithms themselves uh don't scale
very well. they take what so so I mean
load imbalance is a whole different
topic and it is very very difficult to
solve but it is an algorithmic question
um so um you know how would you notice
that well um often um if you run an NPI
profiling tool or spend we had a
somebody mentioned this earlier on it'll
report the amount of time spent in
different routines and often people say
things like oh um um my my program
spends a huge huge amount of time in NPI
all reduce NPI all reduce must be slow
but often that's not the case it's after
you have a load imbalance so all of your
processes are calling NPI all reduce
which is only complete once all
processes have entered there might be
one slow process who's got too much work
and they come in really late so load
balance can be
can often show up as a lot of time spent
in receiving or calling um or calling um
collective routines um and So um you
know tracing tools could often tracing
tools often show learning bounds very
clearly. You can see that some processes
are right and some aren't. Uh but um
these can be quite difficult to you know
quite diff quite difficult tools to run.
But um you know often learns will show
up as a large amount of time spent in
receives weights or collectives. And
that is not that the receive the weight
or the collective took a long time. is
that that that a lot of processes were
were waiting around for other ones to
arrive.
So um synchronization you know when you
send a message uh there is or do a
collective there's both the overhead of
of transmitting the data there's also
the overhead of of processes
synchronizing with each other and in NPI
synchronization is very much coupled to
communication u if you are blocking send
or particular blocking receive there's a
synchronization between send and receive
when the data comes in um so the things
where you you end up waiting are um
blocking send receives waiting for the
non-blocking sender to receive which is
a kind of equivalent thing and also
collective communicators are mostly
synchronizing. Okay. Um now the
the um the I'll come back to some more
the use of blocking pointtooint comps
can result in unnecessary
synchronization. So, um, what this can
mean is, um, if you have, um, lots of
halo swaps to do in, we're going to do
it explicitly in a 3D example. You've
got to send up, send down, send left,
send right, send forwards and backwards.
What I mean by necessary synchronization
is doing them in order, saying, I will
communicate with my top neighbor first,
then my bottom neighbor, then my left
neighbor, then my right neighbor, then
my forward neighbor, then my back
neighbor. you're doing things you're
you're synchronizing with each
communication with every pair wise swap
you're you're doing a synchronization in
a prescribed order. Um the reason why
that can can um can slow your program
down is that you may think that your
program is load balanced in principle
and in practice it won't be. And the
reason is that modern computers are very
complicated and um although you think
your processes were all running at the
same speed, they're probably not.
There's a whole bunch of things going
on, but a classic one is operating
system interrupts. The operating system
has to do stuff every now and again,
okay? It has to do IO. It has to do
things. The operating system has has to
run somewhere. Okay? It has to run on
one of your processes. And so, um,
different processes, different nodes
don't all run at the same speed. And so
although you may think your algorithm is
perfectly load balanced, it may not be.
Things will run at different speeds. And
so it's very important not to impose
unnecessary synchronization because that
will amplify the this load imbalance.
Even if you think your algorithm is
perfectly load balanced.
This I won't go but this was really
first noticed when was this a long I
don't have a date on this term. It's
pretty pretty crummy. Um about 20 years
ago. Um there was a machine called ASKQ
which is one of the first machines to be
built with large shared memory
processors and um people noticed there
that um uh people noticed there that um
uh that they were suffering from load
imbalance even though they thought their
algorithms were load balanced. And for
example, one of the effects they saw is
that um they have had an application
although Sage spends half its time in
all reduce.
Um so they they they were people were a
lot more naive 20 25 years ago they uh
ran this application it spent all its
time in all reduce they made all reduce
faster and it made no difference and the
point was that the fact it was spending
all it time in all reduce was actually
due to um random noise. Sorry, it was
due to synchronization and the
synchroniz the fact that the processes
weren't synchronized was due to random
operating system noise things happening
and they plotted a histogram and you got
a very very nice platon distribution of
um of of how long it took per iteration
of their algorithm and it turned out
here that they that the um the nodes
were um were checking for IO too often
aggressively checking the discs and
flushing to disc
parallel computers out
shared memory nodes and people weren't
hadn't experienced these effects before.
So the trick is to to you have to
realize that your algorithm is probably
somewhat load imbalanced even though you
think they might be perfectly load
balanced and therefore to uh do as
little synchronization as possible.
Um, one thing you can do is to I mean a
very naive thing is uh you know the
collectives if if your collective takes
a long time you can just call it less
frequently and so for example um a
standard thing is to do you know
is you have some optimization algorithm
and you are computing some error or
tolerance. So you loop over lots of
iterations. You update your your arrays.
You compute some local variable. I'll
call it delta. You then do an all
reduced global delta. And then you stop
it less than tolerance. Okay.
So that will stop as soon as the
tolerance falls below some some value.
Um
sometimes it's possible just to say well
actually checking whether I need to stop
checking for the termination condition
if that's very expensive then just do it
every 10 iterations or so okay just
don't do it every iteration now you will
do some redundant loops you will maybe
do 10 up to nine redundant iterations
but that might
be outweighed by the fact you're doing
order of magnitude fewer global um
global sums that is a nice thing if you
can do it. Um uh uh the other the other
thing where you might be doing this, you
might just not even be using this value
as a you might just be printing this to
the screen. Okay, you might be computing
some global value of leverage just
basically um just just just do the
diagnostic less less frequently. Okay.
So this is only possible if this update
to the array is here your actual
algorithm is independent of this loop of
this of this value. Okay. Uh if you do
something like conjugate gradient or
something at one of these standard um
kind of subspace methods um then this
you have to do vector dotproduct where
where the output of that dot product
actually feeds into the updating the
arrays. So this is only possible in
certain cases. I would say the clear
case is uh you you know often just
printing diagnostic values to the screen
if they require global reductions uh you
should just minimize that even even if
so so so if you can just do the collect
although this feels a bit dirty doing
only checking for convergence every 10
iterations it can actually help in
practice
barriers um are almost never required
for program correctness it's a bit of a
subtle point but um
you have to write very very very
contrived programs that um that sorry it
has to be a very contrived NPI program
where you require a barrier for
correctness. Now often that often NPI
programs will run correctly with a
barrier and incorrectly without a
barrier. That's because the NPI program
has a bug. For example, you're not
waiting on a non-blocking communication
correctly and putting a barrier just
happens to fix that. But so so it is it
is very very very rare for a correct NPI
program to require barriers for
correctness. So the first optimization I
always do if I ever see someone's
program is take up all the barriers. You
see people say no um NPI barrier NPI all
reduce they'll be MP make sure all the
data is ready NPI barrier add the
numbers up NPI reduce no the collectives
do the appropriate synchronization okay
you don't have to synchronize yourself
so so so barriers are almost never
required for MPI programs other than in
very contrived situations
that's just really a comment there um so
but really We're going to look at
communications and I'll concentrate
really on on how pointto-point
communication works here. Um oops sorry
I just want to double check. Uh yes
pointto-oint communications.
So we've talked about the small messages
pointto-oint communication 15 startup
cost which is the latency
um and um and uh we have a bandwidth.
The time to send data between processors
is the latency plus the number of bytes
divided by the bandwidth. And we saw
this is a few micro seconds. This is in
the gigabytes per second. Um it's faster
to send one large message versus many
small ones. And so a standard other
trick is to do one or reduce of two
doubles versus two or reduces one
double. So that is you know often you
know often in you you'll have a number
of scalar quantities to add up. Um, you
might have the uh um I don't have an
example here, but you might have u you
know the the the the pressure the the
the the if you're doing a climate
modeling code the pressure, the rainfall
and uh the temperature for example, you
want to average all of them. Don't do
three or reduces of one double. Do one
or reduce of three doubles. It will take
exactly the same amount of time. Okay.
So, for example, you know, people
sometimes get confused by this. I say if
you want to buy three pints of milk from
the supermarket, is it quicker to go to
the supermarket once and buy three pints
of milk or go to the supermarket three
times and buy one pint of milk each
time? It's obvious that the time of
actually buying three pints of milk
versus one is negligible. It's all in
the getting there and back. It's all in
the it's all in the coordination. So,
so, so, so, so you should that is
something which can work. You might say,
well, actually, I can't do a single or
reduce because I have mixed um um types.
I have integers and doubles. Well, you
could, if you're clever, you can use
derived data types. So, you can do a
single or reduce to add up a mixture of
double precision and integer data or you
could just convert the ines to doubles
as well. But that is a standard
optimization trick. Um, uh I I mentioned
before clearly you should send a small
number of large messages when doing
pointtooint, but that translates to
collectives as well. So the collective
operations all reduce have a count and
that is in many programs one but it can
be more than one. So don't do three
reduces of count equals one do one
reduce of count equals three. So that is
a useful technique.
Um but so communications parity this do
design it's it's quite difficult to work
out the timing of your communications
because I said you may have a mental
model of how your algorithm works but at
runtime things may be a bit different.
Um there are a number of standard
patterns which can be the um cause of
poor performance. Um you can identify
them by eye or by experimentation but
they could be detected automatically.
they'll come back. Scholasa
is a tool produced well by a bunch of
people but I know the people from the
Ulix computing center and it's a free um
performance analysis tool but it not
only measures the performance profile of
your code but also tries to and doesn't
just tell you
uh this code spend a lot of time in this
routine. It does try and recognize
patterns and it will try and say this
looks like a problem with this
particular pattern and so I'll cover the
patterns but tools like Scholastica make
an attempt to actually correlate poor
performance with known um poor perform
uh communications patterns. I'll become
more obvious when I show you some
examples. So late sender okay classic
one you issue a receive okay but the
send so so time is going from left to
right here this is when it's issued this
is when it's completed you issue a
receive if a blocking receive is posted
before the matching send the receiving
task must wait till the data is sent
that's kind of obvious but that is you
know that that is sh that is often a
symptom of load imbedance okay late send
is often an where this process is
running ahead of itself it gets to the
receive quickly before this guy gets
there. So that's called a late sender.
There's a large gap. This receive can
only complete when the send is happens
and there's a large amount of time spent
in the receive.
Out of order receives um um late sender
could be the result of having your
receives in the wrong order. So you're
expecting two messages from this guy and
this guy. You should receive to this guy
first, okay, and a receive to this guy
second. You should have put them the
other way round. Okay, so naively you
say, well that's obvious. Okay, I should
issue this send this receive, sorry, the
receive from this guy before the receive
from that guy. So, so it will be
quicker. Of course, in practice,
this was not predictable. In practice,
the fact this send before that send was
just random and the next iteration it
could happen the other way round. So
although this is a genuine problem which
we should try and address, it's rare
that you can say oh clearly I should
receive from rank two um after rank one.
So I should receive from rank one first
then rank two not rank two first then
rank one. Rarely can you do that but
we'll see other techniques uh to do this
but yes out of order received can be
result of having sorry late senders
could be not received in the wrong
order.
I think I heard a question.
Uh
why is the top part? So what we're
saying here is that um
okay so the sends are the same but here
let let's call this 012. Okay they
should here you've got receive from one.
Sorry that here you said I want to
receive a message from rank two then I
want to receive a message from rank one.
Okay. But so you issued the receive to
be from rank two first then rank one.
But when you issued the receive from um
um from rank sorry you issued the
receive here from rank two. Okay. It
wasn't ready. But you but the the rank
one comes in first. So you shouldn't be
receiving from rank two then rank one.
You should be receiving from rank one
then rank two because that's the order
the sends are posted. Does that make
sense? I know you ran over that too
quickly.
Yeah. Okay. So, yeah. So, yeah. Um, so
it's it's basically saying um you want
to receive the messages in the order
they were sent here. Rank one sends
before rank two or you're receiving from
rank two before rank one. But as I said
in so that seems like an obvious thing,
but in practice you don't know what that
order is going to be. So you can't just
say okay uh but there are other
techniques for for um for solving that
uh late receiver.
um if send is synchronous data cannot be
sent to the receive is posted. Now that
may be an explicit synchronous send but
also it could be because you're doing an
MPI a standard send with a very large
well largeish message which will be
implemented with the rendevu protocol
will be implemented synchronously. So
again late receivers I issue a send
here but the receiver is is is is slow.
So I sit in the send. Okay. So this is a
late receiver. Okay.
So the sending task is delayed. So all
of these are you know basically your
sends and receives are are issued at
different times.
So um this is slightly subtle but it is
worth mentioning because the the final
pattern is quite hard to to get your
head around but if you don't have a
model. So I sort of mentioned you
probably think of NPI running
continuously. So when you when you in
when you issue asynchronous or
non-blocking comments you think they
happen in the background. So your model
is that while your process is
calculating the MPI is doing all the
communications. This is actually not
generally true.
So the NPI library is single threaded by
default communication only process when
your program calls an NPI function. So I
kind of mentioned before what happens to
NPI treats u library calls as manual
interrupts. Whenever you call an NPI
whenever you enter the NPI library NPI
goes great now I can go and tidy up all
the stuff that needs to be done do all
my housekeeping before I actually do
what David wants me to do. And so NPI
this called progression. Whenever you
call an NPI routine the first thing NPI
does it tries to progress communications
by match by by matching all the
outstanding sends and receives.
So if you if you issue a non-blocking
send okay if there's an existing receive
it will be um it may be sent if it's not
it's parked but your model is that is
continuously progress in the background
it it cannot be um so it cannot be um
delivered until you make another NPI
call now the obvious thing is um you you
you you um you um it's it's Um
it's an explicit MPI call. Um sorry. So
so so the diagram makes this easier. So
basically okay
um the uh
the sender issues a non-blocking set
says please send this data to this guy.
At that point this receivers has not
been posted. So so this has to be
parked. So this process just remembers
I've got an outstanding message to this
guy. Then this guy issues the receive.
But there's no way that this guy can can
in this we're not in the NPI library
here. So this non-blocking saying cannot
be progressed. Sometime later you call a
function an NPI receive on this which is
unrelated
um to the communication. However, you
call an NPI routine. The first thing the
NPI routine does is oh um um is there
anything I need to do? Oh, I've issued
there's a receive outstanding from this
guy. I can then uh do the send. So
calling an unrelated NPI routine causes
this routine to be to to to um um to be
processed. So the data transfer happens
here. Although that receive has nothing
to do with that send. The only thing
they are related is they both enter the
MPI library.
So
um so there's a okay so there's a
question I'll just
okay so this so so I've seen this so so
that so this apologies I've jumped
this late progress is a weird one but
it's saying that again my previous
statement was if possible post your
receives early if they're already in
place but if you do a non-blocking
operation and there there's no matching
received that block non-block operation
is parked and may not be actually um
kicked kickstarted again until the
sender re-enters the NPI library even if
the call you're making the NPI library
is unrelated to the one that you did
with the send. Now I've seen there's a
question about uh non-block
communications here. Um
yes so Ricky said you have one in
concurrently. Yes, concurrently is the
right uh I guess is the right thing
rather than in parallel. Yeah. Now Mark
says a color works every double comp
double
didn't seem to improve. That's
interesting.
Yes. All I can think is that if you
wrote a synthetic benchmark for that
mark, you would probably see the effect.
Um the problem is yes the synthetic
benchmark measure
um again yes again again if the total
time spent in this was small then you
wouldn't have noticed the difference.
You you did the right thing there though
you know um um sending uh sending two
messages for the two parts of a complex
number is is not a good thing to do. you
did the right thing. But again, if there
was any loaded balance, that would have
completely swamped the um uh swamped the
um the the the the time.
The problem is uh Ian, I don't know if I
quite answer doesn't need to trade off
forward with async at least.
People, some people have suggested you
ought to be able to just call a progress
routine. you ought to be able to say uh
you ought to be able to say um
um advance the NPI library. I think that
the um what I'll say is that these all
show single sends and receives. What
I'll I'll go on to it's a more a general
statement. Hopefully it'll answer your
question what I think the best way is to
do communicate. So I'll maybe run ahead
a bit for the moment. Um so both late
send and latency may be avoidable. More
careful order of computation
communication but often they're really
um um due to random noise. Um so not all
tasks at the same time to do the same
computation. Not all messages take the
same of the same length at the same time
to arrive. So um you know um you can
even see this. Yeah. So you know if
there's network congestion and you you
don't know about in advance obviously
then um then um um
uh then then then your your process will
get out of sync. So what the the general
the general um approach is if you have
lots of communications to do do
everything nonblocking. Okay, issue all
the sends and receives as early as you
can and then do a wait all because by
doing a wait or you're telling NPI,
look, I've got lots and lots of
communications going at once. You sort
sort it out. You process them as and
when they arrive. The problem about
using weights, for example, is you're
saying you're prescribing an order. So,
so your your aim here is not to pres not
to prescribe an order. So what you do is
you you issue all the sends and the
receives and maybe in in 2D halo
swapping that would be and in a 3D halo
swapping that be 12 that's six cents and
six receives you have 12 communication
going at once and you tell you don't
assume what order they'll complete you
NPI wait on all of them to finish by
doing that NPI can basically deal with
them as and when they arrive and that's
the kind of general advice that I would
give and hopefully we'll see that that
actually has a beneficial effect when we
run the benchmark Um,
so yes. So Steven's question, aren't
these don't send? Yes. So I said the the
way to ungum them is people people did
suggest an NPI
an NPI progress command which says do
nothing but progress the um um pro. I
mean there are attempts on on on 2. you
can actually um
run MPI in them. There is a thread which
which which basically loops and and and
kicks the MPI stack every now and again
which to ungun them but unfortunately
that requires you to use a thread safe
we'll talk about this tomorrow a thread
safe version of NPI which has a huge
overhead in itself so it's really a
design problem I don't think NPI would
be designed like this today npi today
will be designed to take advantage of
the fact that you have lots of processes
all of which sorry processors all of
which can run lots threats. So I don't
think that this is the way NPR will be
designed today, but NPR was designed
back over 30 years ago specifically to
be able to run on processes that had no
threading which could only a process
would only run one one thread at one
time. So there was no concept of
interrupts or something. It had to
always have to be done done manually.
So um so weight turning so weighting is
useful if you have something to do. So
if you just want the communications to
finish
then you would just use weight all. If
you were um
if you were if you had to do so so
imagine you were expecting data to come
into a buffer but after arrival that
then needs to be to copied somewhere
else okay you could loop around a wait
any as every message came in you could
say right that one's finished I'll then
copy that to where it needs to go and
then move on to the next one in that so
any would allow you to deal with the
messages which is in the order they came
in, which would be a good thing to do.
Wait all says wait for all to finish,
which is fine. If you're if you're just
expecting the data to arrive, there's
nothing to do with it. You just do a
wait all if there if there is some
actual processing you need to do on that
incoming data like copy it to its final
destination or unpack it or something
then yes, wait any would be you would
loop over weight any potentially loop
over weight any times. Yeah. Again,
sometimes though the more clever
the loop and the sometimes yeah
sometimes people put a lot of effort
into into principle writing very
efficient algorith where they where they
where they deal with them they sometimes
it's just simpler to wait for to come
and do deal sometimes simplified logic
but yes that is the yeah that is wait
all is just for halo swapping where the
data is just arriving if there's
processing to be done then wait any is a
useful way of doing it um Okay.
Um,
okay. They're very interesting
questions. Uh,
so yeah, all non button coms. Yeah. So,
so this is sort of normal halo swapping.
We've got a a situation where we have a
an array with some boundary data. We
want to halo swap it. Uh, okay. And I've
just got an example here where I'm doing
some stencil up, down, left, right. Uh
but but we've got four halos here.
Basically, that's a standard halo
swapping algorithm with a with a 2D
stencil.
Um don't impose unnecessary order of
messages. Okay. Um
uh you could do loop over sources up,
down, left, right, receive the value
from a particular source, end the loop.
Okay. Um you could try and use MPA any
source. you could loop over the sources,
receive the device in any sort and end
the loop. Um, however, um, it's actually
better. Um, wild carding has its
overheads. So, I think you just won't
want to do this. So, so, so definitely
you don't want to do this. You don't
want to say I want to receive up,
receive down, receive left, receive
right. You could do four um, receives
where you receive from NPI, any source.
That doesn't feel right. The best thing
to do is non-blocking here. Okay. If
you're a separate non-blocking receive
for each source, then it's your way at
all. So, um, yeah, do not want person
unless you're ordering a message. Loop
over directions. Send up, receive down.
Send down, receive up. Okay, you don't
want to do that. You want to loop over
directions. You want to do I send up and
I receive down. And I send down, I
receive up. And then wait on all the
requests. So, you issue all the sends
and receives up, down, left, right,
forward, backward. And I said that's 12
communications in three dimensions. and
then wait at all to finish. And there's
even more um you can be even more clever
and overlap communication with the core
calculation.
Uh if if you if you want to be clever um
I think I heard a question coming in. So
yes, so I so this is illustrated by my
benchmark. I don't like send receive.
Okay, because send receive is is is
prescribing a pair-wise synchronization.
And so you'll see in the Halo swapping
benchmark that send receive is not a
good thing to do. Sorry, not an optimal
thing to do. Apologies. Um
um so um you know what you can do now if
you want is you can say basically you
can send off the boundary data
do all the communications on the
interior region. Sorry on the interior
region here. Okay. So I I update the
interior. Now I wait for the completion
of non-blocking center received would be
the calculation of the four edges.
That's another technique that people do.
Um it may or may not help you but it's
something which people do. And uh a
final thing uh sorry
my mouse here. Um
um
some people um
you can try and and and and so in this
situation we swap a halo of depth one.
We swap near allows us to do one
iteration for we have to swap the halos
again.
You can say well let's trade off latency
and bandwidth and swap a deep halo.
We'll swap a halo of depth too. that
allows us to do two iterations before we
do um an next communication. So so so so
you do you do two iterations um and then
you you communicate twice the data every
other iteration. Um that in principle
you might think is a good idea. The
problem is in practice it has its
downside that if I don't want to go go
on about this too much but if you think
about it in it it implies near sorry it
implies diagonal communications. So in
with this standard up down left right
stencil we only have to communicate with
our four neighbors. If I want to swap
halos of depth two I need to communicate
that data there and that is a diagonal
communication.
So uh you have to send that data up
that data right
and that data diagonally unfortunately.
And so although deep halos sound like a
good idea in principle that you do um
you only communicate every two
iterations and to in practice they're
in practice they do have their their
their disadvantages.
Um so um yeah that was just a yeah you
do so you do two calculations for each
communication and then and then halo
swap again I'm not really a because it
implies diagonal communications
um I've mentioned position
communications actually uh this is just
a repetition that rather than doing uh
that than um I receive I send and await
all you can set them not once and doing
it. But again in practice uh persistent
communications have almost no benefit.
Um um in principle NPI can skip the
error checking. So what it can do is
here in principle MP has to do an error
check on all the variables for every
call. Here it has to do only do the
error checking at the the initialization
and it says everything's okay and then
it knows they're all but in practice
that's of negligible benefit. So,
um I'm not going to talk about
neighborhood collectives because that
was something that um um
I was going to um I'm not going to talk
about those. Um
I I'm running slightly late, but the
collective communications are have all
the same um issues
in principle the same patterns or poor
patterns for poor performance as as
pointto-point do. So for example, if you
have a late broadcaster. Yeah. Um
yes. So I I I there is actually so I'm s
sorry I I have put this talk together
from a couple other talks. There is a
there is there should have been a slide
after that that says exactly as you
said. Who's Stephen? Um
if yes so so so so you're you're
absolutely right. Can you see my you can
see my camera. What you're saying is
that if I do the horizontal
communications first then when I do the
the vertical ones I can carry that data.
Yeah. So you're correct. However, that
implies more synchronization because you
basically then have to synchronize for
each dimension. Um, so it's probably
better than the um than the explicit
diagonals, but it does have its downside
because you you basically have to
complete you then have to have a
ordering. You have to complete the
horizontal swaps before the for the
vertical ones before the the ones in the
third dimension. So you're absolutely
right that is that is what you can do
that but uh you then lose the fact
you're then imposing more
synchronization because you have to
order the halo swaps. One has to
complete before the next one. each
dimension has to complete internal and
next one can take over. So it's just
it's it's just nasty. It sounds like a
really good idea, but it just never
really seems to pan out. Does that make
does that make sense? Yeah, I think
that's what you're saying there. Yeah.
So again, it has its downside. It might
work for you. What I would say is the
biggest mistake people make if they
write a program with all these bells and
whistles and never have the default
implementation. If you have a groovy
version of the algorithm, make sure your
code also has the simple one because
sometimes the simple one can be faster
because all the extra logic and messing
around and and and branching and of the
complicated algorithm may not be worth
it. So it's fun to do, but you really
should at the end of the day time it.
That's the biggest mistake people make
is they only have the complicated
algorithm. Keep the simple one in so you
can you can run them all and see which
one is actually faster in practice
because it will depend on the target
architecture.
they all have their downsides. Uh so
late broadcaster is just uh
you know if if if the guy if the person
who has the data comes in um then um you
can see this often happens because rank
zero might be reading in a file then
broadcasting and all the other guys go
on to broadcast first. But it's the same
for any collective uh early reduce.
Yeah. If if if one person calls reducing
not everyone is ready, then you're going
to have a lot of time spent. Um and all
to all again in in in algorithms which
have global um transpositions like for a
transforms where you're you're you're
doing effectively transposing the data
array to make different dimensions local
each at each phase.
um you have an order to wall um and that
um again you that there needs to be
synchroniz there needs to be
you that will show up load balance all
I'm really saying here is that all of
these all all uh forms of collective
communication will will like to show up
uh as load imbalance
um
so yeah so whoops so Um
well I'll just slightly reject you the
time but the collectors are copially
well optimized it's rarely useful to
implement themselves um they are
expensive and force synchronization so
you help to reduce help to you should
use them as apologies should use them as
should they use as far as possible but
in many yeah we've talked about this now
non-blocking collectors rather than NPI3
okay so you can actually called a
non-blocking collective. In practice, I
have never found them of any use for I
mean we can discuss this offline but I I
there are algorithmic reasons because if
you look at things like iterative like
conjugate gradient you almost always
need the result of the dotproduct
immediately you compute it
alpha equals x dox and then the the
scaler alpha is used in the very next
line. So algorithmically I have never
seen them to that much use and in
practice they don't seem to be
implemented but I I struggle to I I
struggle to see other than the very few
niche areas I struggle to see um
situations where non-blocking
collectives actually help in practice.
They sound like a great idea but I'm not
convinced they are.
Uh the general advice
um oops
try to avoid imposing any anonyming
because the actual message ordering can
change each time you run it. So my
general advice is to try to allow API to
deal with messages as they happen. Issue
all sends and receives nonb blocking.
Also issue the receives as early as
possible often because remember as I
said if the receives are in place the
send will complete quickly and often you
can pre-post the receives. You might be
tempted to post receive at the at the
the beginning of your current iteration.
Sometimes you can pre-post at the end of
your last iteration. You could get kind
of blows your mind, but sometimes you
can actually pull the receives quite
high up. Um set up as persistent coms or
use neighborhood collectors. Um avoid a
single collector call by aggregation and
I do you really need any of those
boundaries? That's always my big
question.
Um um so we've we've talked about these
lack of parallelism and loaded balance
are very difficult to uh um
deal with because there aren't good
synchronization is you can you can
improve this by not having the process
waiting for each other and an
inefficient path of communication you
can address. I mean it is quite tough. I
think it's it's useful to have these
models and these these these these
terminology like late sender late
receiver are useful when talking to
other people have a have a common
framework for talking about these things
but if there's one thing I would say
maybe said it too many times if possible
just don't impose an ordering issue all
your communications as non-blocking
calls and have a single weight all to
let and that allows NPI to deal with
them as and when they come in and the
exercise we'll do after the break is to
run the halo swapping
um benchmark and we will see which of
these is fastest in in in practice.
So there've been lots of interesting
questions there. Um I think that um
I'm not going to have a chance as I sort
of rejig the timet because of ordering
things as to how people um
express their preference. I'm not going
to have time to do the um uh my brain is
going the um optimized the the the the
trendy use of drive data types for for
advanced collectives. I will the lecture
is still there. I think the best thing
to do is maybe take a slight my voice is
going a bit. So if we take a take a 20
minute 20 minute break um and come back
and then concentrate at the end on doing
the um the halos swapping bench and I
might just explain the the crux of the
issue with the uh with the derived data
types visav collectives but I don't
think I'll have time to go through the
whole lecture. So as I said I'm my voice
is slightly giving out but what I will
do is um
the next exercise is the um
which we'll do when I come back in about
20 minutes time is the is the halos
swapping one which is in a g uh yeah
meter 20 I was just about to um
but I would be
quite interested if someone could redo
I've not done
If someone was keen, they could redo the
pointto-point um
uh pingpong using the UCX uh protocol,
which there it's just a matter of
swapping some modules. So you'll see
there I've got a link in the
instructions. They're actually part of
the Halo swapping benchmark, but they
apply equally to the ping pong. If you
could maybe somebody could run
inter and intra node ping pongs using
UCX, not and you don't need to
recompile. just a bodil swap at runtime.
That would be very interesting. It might
try and elucidate what the issues are.
Okay. Okay. Thanks. So, see you in 20
minutes. I got to get some more water.